So now we're gonna give you an extended
example of people analytics at work and
follow that with some detailed issues
involved in many analytics projects.
So this example comes from my work
with the national football league.
As a result of some research I did a few
years ago, I've been pulled in to work
with some professional teams on
their evaluation of players.
And especially their
evaluation of college players.
One team in particular asked me,
who is good at evaluating college players?
Which team should they be paying attention
to, which team should they be copying?
So, I'll tell you about that analysis, but
first I wanna give you just a little
bit of background on the NFL draft.
So the NFL draft,
this is the National Football League,
this is American football.
And we will talk some about football,
but you should think about
this as any hiring exercise.
So this is a law firm hiring
new law school graduates.
This is Google hiring new programmers
to work out in Mountain View.
This is Credit Suisse looking for
new financial analysts.
Think of this as recruiting
quite generally.
In the NFL, the draft involves
looking at college players,
here Jamal Charles from
the University of Texas.
They watch his tape from
when he was on college,
then they bring him into the combine and
they measure them in all kinds of ways,
how high they can jump,
how fast they can run.
They slot them into orders,
the preferences they have for
these players, so
here's a typical war room from the NFL.
This is Jerry Jones,
who's the owner of the Dallas Cowboys
with the list of players.
And all the teams have these war rooms
with lists of players all year round.
Eventually they make their choices.
This is on the NFL Draft, this
happens each April, now maybe May, and
is a major sporting event in and
of itself.
And then finally, they get to see that
player on the professional field.
So this is Jamaal Charles playing for
the Kansas City Chiefs.
And the big question is,
to what extent does what they see in
college relate to what they see in pro?
To what extent can we observe a student
performing in a law school and
forecast how well they're
gonna be as an actual lawyer?
That's what's interesting about studying
an NFL, we have better data and
more observable outcomes
than almost anywhere else.
So we can really dig
into these decisions and
evaluate how good a job the teams are
doing and identify where the mistakes are.
So, this is the process the team
comes to me and asks me about.
Who does this well?
Which of the 32 National Football League
teams does this well?
One measure for
how a team is doing in the NFL draft is,
how many of their players
make the all star game.
In american football that is
called the Pro Bowl and so
we can look at how many players that they
draft that eventually make the Pro Bowl.
And we can compare across the 32 teams
which teams are good at drafting players
that make the Pro Bowl,
which teams are not so good.
So in this chart,
we look at 11 years of NFL drafts and
we follow the players' performance for
their entire career,
however we long we get to
observe them through 2009.
So we begin with the 1997 draft
through the 2007 draft and
we observe them through 2009.
And count up the number of
Pro Bowls played by players
that were drafted by each team.
So, in a year a team drafts seven or
eight players on average.
And then on average, a player might play
three or four years, sometimes longer for
very successful players.
So, we can add these up over time and
get some sense of which teams are having
more or less success in the NFL draft.
If you do that, between 1997 and
2007, this is what you see.
At the top, with the Indianapolis Colts,
you see that they drafted players
that made 35 Pro Bowls over
the time that we observed.
And that ranges all the way down to
the bottom teams, Cleveland and Detroit,
who drafted players that made
only five and six Pro Bowls.
So there are huge differences in
the quality of the players drafted by
Indianapolis, and
those drafted by Cleveland and Detroit.
With a big spread in between,
all the other teams falling in between.
So, this analysis, in fact, was first
done by a Journalist, Rick Ryley,
who at the time,
was with Sports Illustrated.
And when he saw those numbers,
he said the Indianapolis Colts,
not just with Peyton Manning,
but Dwight Freeney, Edgerrin James,
Reggie Wayne these were genius picks.
On the other hand, the Cleveland Browns
screwed the Chihuahua.
Their run of number one picks
from 99 to 02 is the single
worst stretch of drafting since
the Iraqi Republican Guard.
Were they using an Ouija board?
So clearly Riley feels you can draw some
very strong inferences from this data.
And I wanna give Riley credit because
at least he quotes the data, right?
And one of the things he was
saying in this article was, fans,
don't worry too much at the time
the players are drafted,
you don't really know there's so
much uncertainty you have to wait a while.
And so he waited a while and he crunched
the numbers and now he's certain.
But the trouble is,
there's reason for skepticism.
Reason for Skepticism includes some work
I did a few years ago with Richard Taylor
on how overconfident teams
are in the NFL draft.
That work led me to appreciate how
much uncertainty there really is and
it seems unlikely to me that some teams
are so much better than others given that.
Baron and Hershey, our colleague Jack
Hershey here at in my department actually,
OID here at Warton.
Studied something that came to be
known as the outcome bias years ago.
That we tend to judge employees,
individuals,
organizations by what happens.
Good outcomes lead us to believe that
the employees are good, bad outcomes,
lead us to believe the employees are bad.
Regardless of how much control
they had over the process,
so maybe we're guilty of outcome bias when
we look at the Indianapolis Colts and
see that Peyton Manning has
been in all these Pro Bowls.
And then finally, Matthew Rabin,
behavioral economist, did some work
where he used the Law of Small Numbers
to evaluate some decision making
biases that individuals showed.
And he found that there's less
difference in skill than people believe.
He called it fictitious variation.
And he said fictitious variation's
the most important economic consequence of
the law of small numbers that we
infer too much from small samples.
That's something we're gonna talk about
a little bit more at another place in
the module.
But this academic research gives
us reason to be skeptical.
That these differences are truly the
product of some teams being better than
other teams at selecting.
So, to dig in this in a little more
detail, we'll drop to the data.
And we're gonna get into more
detail in this part of the course.
In this part of the performance evaluation
module more now than anywhere else.
So, let's actually crunch some numbers.
Here, we will look at Performance for
Players Drafted 1991-2004.
So these are players we can observe
perform at least five years and
have a pretty good sense of how they're
gonna be as professional football players.
We can look at how they perform
in a few different ways.
The patterns are always the same.
The guys taken at the top of the draft
are better than the guys taken at
the bottom of the draft.
So in this graph, we show you the number
of starts that the typical player taken at
the start of the draft plays relative
to the guys taken at the bottom.
About 250 drafts in each year, so, if you
look at the blue line this is the number
of games started by a player drafted,
the first player taken in the draft.
And that drifts down where by
the end of say the fifth round,
160 picks later, those guys
are starting about 20% as many games as
the guys taken at the start of the draft.
So, a big drop in performance.
The drop is even steeper for
the more extreme performance.
So, Pro Bowls,
we were just talking about Pro Bowls.
Does the team,
does the player make an all star game?
The Pro Bowl measure drops from
the guys taken at the top of the draft.
By the time you're down to the second
round, the bottom of the second round,
about the 65th pick, you're below 20%,
it's a very steep performance drop-off.
This suggests that there is skill involved
in drafting players, that the scouts and
the general managers involved
with identifying college players,
know what they're doing,
because the guys taken at the top
are better than the guys down below.
But, does that mean that there
are differences in skill?
Remember that the team that asked me
to look into this wanted to know Which
teams are better at this,
which teams are worse at this,
who should they be paying attention to.
That suggests that some teams
are better than others.
Skill is involved, but
are there differences in skill?
This goes back to our question of
can you separate signal from noise?
Can you really infer whether
the teams are good at this, or
whether they just got lucky?
So, that's where we go next.
And we're gonna do one thing first.
I said in an earlier module,
that you have to be very careful,
in performance evaluation,
comparing employees to one another.
Unless they're in very similar situations,
you will have trouble
comparing them one to another.
So we're gonna make one adjustment
before we start comparing these
teams to each other.
And that is we're gonna control for
where they picked in the draft.
Some teams pick earlier in the draft,
some teams pick later in the draft, and so
we want a norm for
where they actually picked.
So, we're gonna do that by
looking at what would we expect.
This line shows you what you would expect,
for a performance measure, in this case,
the games started per season.
What would you expect for the first player
taken in the draft, based on history?
What would you expect for
the 33rd player taken in the draft,
again based on history?
This line just charts that.
So, on average, over, over a long period
of time, we've observed fourteen,
fifteen years.
The top player in the draft averages
about 11 starts per season.
This is most, 11 starts out of 16,
this is most of the season,
he's starting for five years.
This is a very successful player.
And then drifts down rather
smoothly to say two starts a year.
By the guys taken 160th.
So you get this smooth decline.
This means that when a team
drafts a player 33rd,
you should expect that he's gonna play,
what does it look like, eight and half,
eight and quarter games per season.
So, that's expectation.
We wanna know what our expectation is for
any given decision, so
that we can evaluate it in terms of
deviation from that expectation.
We don't want to reward a team for
picking a good player
just because they were fortunate enough
to have the first pick in the draft.
We don't want to penalize a team for
picking a bad player just because
they had a later pick in the draft.
So it's very important to
contextualize in this way.
We'll talk a lot more
about contextualization
else where in people analytics, but
I want to use it here because if we
are going to compare across teams.
We need to norm their position,
so that's what we do.
This is what it looks like.
This is an example of one team,
the New England Patriots in 2003,
their draft that year.
They had a lot of picks that year.
This looks about ten picks.
And in each case,
we plot where the player was drafted.
As you move from left to right,
the top player was Warren taken
in about pick number ten.
And it goes all the way down to
Kelley taken late in the draft.
And then we plot on the Y-axis how well
that player performed over the first five
years, which is a period of
time we can be very confident
he was with the team that
actually drafted him.
So the team that drafted him has
generated the benefit of the draft.
And what do we see?
We see in general the guys taken
early in the draft did better,
the guys taken Later in the draft it works
but there's lots of variation, right?
So, consider Koppen.
Koppen was drafted,
he was the sixth player drafted,
he wasn't taken until a hundred and
sixty second, a hundred and sixty third.
but he was the best performer over
the next five years of anybody else in
the draft class.
He started almost every game for
almost the whole five years.
This was a wildly successful
selection late in the draft,
and so you get a very positive
deviation when you evaluate that pick.
Contrast that for example with Johnson.
Johnson was drafted 37, 38, and when
a person's drafted at that level we expect
them start about seven games a year.
He only started two.
So this is way below expectations.
We code that as an unsuccessful pick.
So, now what we want to know is, do teams
tend to have relatively successful picks?
Do they tend to have
relatively unsuccessful?
Or is it just randomly distributed
around what would be expected?
That's where we're going when we're
trying to determine is there skill here?
Or is there luck.
So, here's an example of one of
the most famous draft classes in
national football league history.
The Pittsburg Steelers, famous draft class
of 1974, they drafted four hall of fame
players, Jack Lambert, Lynn Swan,
John Stallworth, Mike Webster.
All these guys were hugely successful,
not just for a year, but for a career.
Now, if the draft,
if the Center Field draft involves skill.
This is a team.
They drafted these players because
they're especially good at their job.
What would you expect to
happen the next year in 1975?
So, assume you've got the same scouts,
you've got the same general manager.
They select all these
great players in '74.
If that's the result of skill,
what would you expect to happen in '75.
Or, what would you expect to happen in 73?
Let's look at 73.
In 73,
their 2nd round pick never played a game.
Their 3rd and
4th round picks were average at best.
And yet, that was just one year before
they had this Hall of Fame class.
What about 75?
What about the next year?
In 75 it was even worse.
Not a single player drafted started.
Out of 21 picks at this enormous draft,
and not a single player drafted started.
And picks in each of the top six rounds.
They only played a total of 24 games for
the team.
So, what do we think about a process
where you draft one of the best classes
ever, probably the best class ever, in 74.
And yet
the 73 draft was completely average.
And the 75 draft was actually
tragically bad by any measure.
What does that say about how
much skill is involved in this?
How much credit should we give them for
that Hall of Fame class in 74?
That's the idea, and
that's a very general idea
that's maybe the biggest lesson
in the performance evaluation is.
The question is, does it persist?
Skill persists.
Chance doesn't persist.
And if the challenge is to
parse skill from chance,
the single most important
test is persistence.
Do you see it across periods?
Do you see it over time?
Do you see the positive
performance measures persist?
That's what we're gonna do here.
This is one look at that for
the NFL draft.
This is the only real analytics
we're gonna do in this example.
We're gonna take all the years
that we observed teams draft and
we're gonna code them up in
just the way we described.
We're going to, evaluate does a player
do better or worse than expectations.
And for that year we're going to
add up all of those deviations or
the positive and the negative,
do they add up to zero, whatever.
We're going to evaluate every team and
each year of the draft.
And we're going to rank the league,
one to 32 within a year on how
they performed in a draft.
And then we're gonna ask
what happens to next year.
So for
all the teams that did best in a year,
what happens to them in
the next year's draft?
And we're gonna do for
the teams that rate 16th in a given year,
what happens in the next years draft?
That's gonna give us
a test of persistence.
If this is a skill based task,
those teams that do well
in the draft in a given year
will do well the following year.
Those teams that do poorly will do poorly.
If it's completely chance,
how a team performs in one year
will have nothing to do with
how they perform the next year.
There'll be no correlation
between the two.
And if it's a mix of skill and chance,
you'll see something in between.
That the teams that do well one year
will tend to do better the next year and
the teams that do poorly will tend to do
poorly but they'll regress to the mean.
So that's the test.
We'll find out what happens.
This is what we find.
I've shown all the teams, over all
the years in our study here in gray.
But then I've highlighted the bunch
that were rated in number one,
from the top in green.
And then in the middle in blue,
and the bottom in red.
And what do we see?
What do we see here about the relation
between how a team does in one year and
the following year?
At a high level,
we see essentially no relation.
Consider, for example,
the teams at the very top in green.
These are teams that, in a given season,
were the single top performing
team in drafting players.
What happens to them the next year?
Well, one team was again
the top-performing team.
But, one team was also
the worst-performing team.
And you can see that there's a full
spread, that from that number one
position, they went to every other
position from one to thirty-two,
there was no predictive quality.
About their first year
performance in the next year.
And conversely, the same at the bottom.
You can look at the teams in red,
which is 28th or so, and
in one case, 28th was again 28th,
almost perfect persistence.
But, in the other cases, they drifted up,
some were kinda middling the next year,
and some were actually quite
good in the following year.
So, this tells us overall
the correlation is slightly negative.
Not different from zero but
slightly negative.
Essentially, zero, there's no correlation
between how a team drafts at one year and
how they draft the next year.
And when there's no correlation,
we can be sure,
that means the differences that we
observe are not the product of skill,
the differences we observe
are the product of chance.
So, this is one performance measure,
it's a starts, you can do this for
other performance measures, this is how
much a player receives in compensation,
when he reaches free agency, you can use
any number of performance measure and
you get the same result.
Most of the deviation
goes away the next year
which means that most of the deviations,
most of the differences between teams
are the result of chance and not skill.
So, different performance stats,
different player career stage.
You can norm for
additional factors like a player position.
You can evaluate not the team
level performance, but
you actually look at the person in charge,
whether it's a general manager or
an owner, and you can track that
individual's performance over his career,
and again you don't see persistence.
The vast majority of the variation
is purely a product of chance.
So, you might say, fine, fine, fine, this
fancy regression to the mean analysis,
persistent analysis, but
what about this chart?
Because it's hard to make
sense of this chart, right?
That's a lot of variation.
Can you really get that
much variation from chance?
So, quick demonstration.
In this case, we charted every
player by what team drafted him.
Let's do something else.
Instead, let's look at every player by
what day of the month he was born on.
And we can ask are there differences in
the likelihood of making the Pro Bowl
as the result of being born on the 3rd
of the month, or the 28th of the month,
or the 10th of the month.
We do that because we know that's random.
We know that can't possibly be
related to player performance.
And we're curious if you do that,
what pattern do you see.
Well, you see a very similar pattern
to what happens when you bend
by which team chose them.
So, if we get the exact same pattern,
and in fact,
it's the exact same pattern, when we bend
by day of the month they were born on,
as when we bend by the team
that drafted them,
it ought to give us caution in drawing
any inferences about those teams.
Because it shows that even these
dramatically disparate outcomes
can be purely the product of chance.
And this is something we need
to be reminded of again and
again, we'll drop into some of
those details subsequently, but
we need to be reminded again and
again that big variations in performance
measures can be purely
the product of chance.
And so, we want to be very careful
about drawing strong inferences
about the skill or the effort that
underlie the performance measure.
One last note before we go.
You might ask well maybe people already
know this, people that follow football,
maybe you don't follow football so
you don't know.
Do people think this?
Have a quick study with
Berkeley Dietvorst, a PhD student here on
what people believe to be the driver
of NFL draft performance.
We asked people how much draft outcome
is completely due to random chance
versus draft outcomes are completely
due to drafting skill?
Where on that continuum, skill to chance,
do you believe draft outcomes fall?
And we asked this of NFL fans and
we screened them, for actually following
the NFL and what do you see, you see
people, they don't think it's all skill.
But the vast majority of people believe
that it is on the skill side of
the continuum.
Almost nobody says that
it's chance-related.
By far the most are two-thirds,
three-quarters, skill.
And these are folks that actually
follow NFL, follow the draft.
They know that there's
a little chance involved, but
they greatly underestimate the amount
of chance that's involved.
I wanna close this example, this extended
example with a quote from Michael Lewis.
The author Michael Lewis started
his career with Lias Parker,
about Salmon brothers wrote
more recently on WallStreet,
probably best known for his book,
Moneyball, on analytics and baseball and
he said when talking after that book
was published that people ask him
Lewis you've studied more serious topics,
why are you studying baseball now?
And he said the following,
which I think is very instructive.
He said if professional baseball players,
whose achievements are endlessly watched,
discussed and analyzed by tens of millions
of people, can be radically mis-valued,
who can't be?
If such a putatively meritocratic culture
as professional baseball can be so
sloppy and inefficient, what can't be?
So this, again, should give us great
pause if in this world of football with
very good performance measures on the way
in, great outcome measures on the way out,
millions of dollars at stake, millions of
people watching these decisions and yet
we still see these kinds of mistakes made
and not appreciated, we still see people
misunderstanding skill versus chance in
this very important task in that culture.
What does that say about what's going on
in firms that we don't have as much, or
we don't have as many people watching.
We don't have as good an outcome measure.
It should give us pause at the quality
of the inferences that are being drawn
in the organizations that you and
I work in.